My name is Tom Mock, I'm a product manager here at Posit,
and I oversee the Positron IDE,
as well as our studio and Posit Workbench,
as well as AI integrations into those tools,
both in kind of some of the add-in space for our studio,
and we'll be talking about today
with Positron via Positron Assistant.
I think with a lot of the tools
that we've talked about today,
there's kind of the integration points,
as well as the applications you might build out of that.
With Positron Assistant,
and what I'm talking about in my section,
it'll mostly be focused on the developer tooling.
So what is the experience that you as a data scientist,
data analyst, applied scientist are doing inside your IDE?
Positron Assistant looks something like this
inside of Positron.
If you're not aware of what Positron is,
it's a brand new IDE that we've released
into general availability on desktop,
and that's coming out in Posit Workbench here shortly.
But Positron Assistant is a subtool
within the Positron IDE that provides
kind of a unified chat interface
with different backend model providers.
It's a GNI client, native to Positron,
a client meaning that Posit doesn't actually see
any of the data that you're sending.
It's purely between you and the model provider you choose.
And to that point, it's built off this idea
of a future with your bring your own model provider backend.
So I'll talk about a little bit more,
but right now it's very anthropic centric
because of how good their cloud models are at code generation
but we layer on our own system prompt
and other contexts on top of that.
And ultimately we expect that different customers,
especially like yourselves or different user groups
would actually be bringing some of your own
potential self-hosted models
or routing to many different model providers.
Part of the play here,
part of the kind of reason why we're investing
so heavily into this space
is there's lots of great extensions out there.
You can use Google Gemini or AWS Q or Klein
or all these other, Claude code,
all these tools inside of tools like Positron.
But a lot of them, if not all of them
are missing the context of what you do in memory
or in the ephemeral state beyond just the files on disk.
And I'll talk a little bit about what that means.
Again, if you wanted to try this out
you could download Positron desktop today
and try it out in your desktop environment.
Or if you are using Posit Workbench
it'll be available there shortly in our upcoming release
that is due out in days to weeks.
As I mentioned, part of the story here
is that the AI space is moving really rapidly.
And so there's lots of different models out there,
different model providers.
And again, Positron Assistant is trying to be
a general unified interface to them.
So today that means we support two providers.
We support Anthropic directly via API key for chat.
And then we have GitHub Copilot for inline completions.
We're also exploring GitHub Copilot for chat modalities
along with a host of other providers,
your Databricks, Snowflake, your AWS Bedrock and the like
that provide models both from Anthropic and others.
Lastly, and again, I wanna emphasize this
in terms of for this group of people
in terms of some of the data privacy
or potentially cost efficiency,
I've talked to a lot of different people
that also are self-hosting their own models
whether that's for, again, privacy reasons
or very specific datasets are not allowed
to go out to these cloud providers
even with the contracts you have in place.
So we also wanna support OpenAI compatible endpoints
in the future to allow you to basically
bring your own model.
And that's intended to be used with high quality models
but like with models that you are serving up
or providing access to.
While I've talked a little bit prior
about it being like the sidebar chat modality,
it also offers inline chat.
So again, even without code completion
because some of these model providers
don't offer an inline completion model,
there's still support for things like inline chat.
And importantly, whether you're working
on the sidebar chat or the inline chat,
you still have access to all of the custom contexts
I'll talk about in a second.
And you might have an example of like I have a source file,
I can open it up and I can say, ask a question
and it will actually inject a little portion
that then opens up a temporary chat
just within that line of code.
And it grabs that line of code you're working on
and a little bit of extra context around it
as well as all the in-memory context
that things like your console in R or Python
or your in-memory data frames
or other objects you've defined.
So again, I'm gonna talk a lot about sidebar chat
and that's what you'll see,
but just know that inline chat
is also kind of a critical capability that overlaps.
So again, at the very beginning
kind of coming back around to this,
I said, part of why we're doing this
is we want to enrich the context
beyond the files on disk, right?
All the AI tooling out there within an IDE
largely says, hey, you're working in a source file,
we take that source file, package it up,
send it to the model as a prompt along with your ask
and then you get a response back.
Positron goes a step further
and uses a technology called tool calling internally
to provide additional tools that the model is aware of.
These tools could be things like,
hey, if the user asks about something
like the current session, right?
The model can ask Positron,
what is the user working in, right?
They're working in an R environment
and we can report back information like,
oh, your R console is R version 4.4.3
and inside of your session, right?
Not just the actual console, but inside of your session,
you've defined a data frame like this Olympics dataset
and here's the schema, how big it is,
the column names, the number of rows,
other information that's loaded there in memory.
And we can repeat this for many other kind of tools
that are available inside of Positron,
like the plot pane, session input and output,
you know, the console history
and other tools that we wanna make available over time
within the IDE.
But importantly, this type of novel context
is going beyond what a lot of the other AI tooling
are providing in addition to all of the like source files
and the training data and other things that are available
outside of the memory context.
Importantly, this also works for Python,
you know, Positron is intended to be a polyglot IDE,
so the things you can do in R, you can also do in Python,
the things you can do in Python, you can also do in R.
So you could ask a similar question
and it can report back about a Python console
as well as the in-memory state on that.
Now, to dive in a little bit further,
now that we've kind of defined this idea of tool calling,
you could imagine I might be building applications
or might be doing an analysis
and I'm working with specific datasets
that have been defined, right?
So when I'm asking questions,
it actually can ask about, you know,
what is this data frame I have defined?
This new data frame contains these columns
and it kind of describes them or has information about them,
the encoding, the schema of that data.
So again, rather than you having to manually encode this
into your source file or to manually, you know,
write it out in your literal prompt,
like for column one, which is MPG do X,
you could actually just have the model
passively know this information
as you're asking other questions,
where that better context should lead to better results
or better kind of outputs from your model.
This of course, isn't limited to just data frames.
It could be other objects you've defined in memory
and again, works across languages.
The other example that I think is really neat
is because you have an active console, right?
There's context there.
And one of the ways I like to highlight this
is kind of nuanced is you can imagine all IDEs, right?
Can say you have a static analysis error
in your source file,
meaning you've done something like misspelled
a function name.
And even without LLMs, right?
Your IDE can say, hey, there's a problem here.
You should probably fix it.
However, if a data frame or a data object
is missing a column, your script doesn't know that.
And the language server protocol or the layer on top,
the static analysis doesn't know that.
But when you run that code,
basically these runtime errors versus kind of linting errors,
that's where positron assist can also help out.
Where as you're building up an analysis
or debugging something,
it has context to not only what is the source file showing,
but what are the error messages,
the literal trace back that's in the console.
It can pull that in and say,
oh, I see the source file in the lines you're working on.
I see the error.
Let me help you fix that within all of that context.
And again, both R and Python,
not just limited to one language.
So I like to use that for examples of, again,
the in-memory state is important
and the runtime details are very, very important.
You can also go one step further.
And for a lot of models out there,
they can interpret graphics or images.
So we make use of this for viewing things like plots,
where not only can the model and positron assistant say,
oh, we have source code to generate a plot
and we can interpret and work on that,
the actual source code of how you got there,
but the actual plot that you generated
can be included as context.
So it could help with things like,
oh, well, this looks overly compact.
Do you want to change the dimensions?
Where your source code may not have anything to do
with the XY coordinates or the size of the chart,
but we can see in the plot pane that the graphic is too small
or what are the other ways of showing a distribution
or this data in a different way,
or help me generate alternative text
or a description of this plot and many other situations.
And then lastly, around the session state,
there's all that information
about what language is active in the console,
R or Python, what version,
what packages are available
in terms of they've been loaded
or available in the environment.
What was the last execution or the error?
Help me fix those things.
So all of these little pieces of context
when you add them together,
give you a lot more context to provide to the model
to generate better results
based upon what you're actually working on.
Rather than having to manually specify,
here are the 10 packages that I want to use,
it has some of that context passively.
Importantly, while you could imagine some of this data,
you're like, wow, that's a lot of data,
but I'm pretty sensitive about what data is going across.
Again, importantly,
this is between you and the model provider.
So you've already vetted a model provider
to allow you to ask questions
or you have some type of contract
or negotiation with them.
So importantly, like we as a company as Posit,
we're not trying to inject ourselves in the middle
or really think about like hosting models,
we're providing a client.
So that relationship is between you
and the model provider
and the data that's being transferred back and forth.
So it's only being sent to the large language model API,
not to others.
There is local context
that you can imagine like in your session output,
there's information used for debugging purposes for yourself,
but that again is your personal machine
or your personal kind of workbench instance
where you again own the data or have control over the data.
I'll also talk a little bit about a roadmap item
that we've been working on.
I talked about how you can fix things
in the Posture and Assistant sidebar chat
and ask a question,
but we're also injecting directly within the console
fix and explain actions.
So this basically says like,
as soon as you see an error,
there's a little shortcut you can do
to help resolve that error
or explain what's going on
if you can't interpret the trace back kind of ad hoc.
So in this exact case,
I've clicked on fix that
and it says, oh, well, here's the trace back,
here's a little context
of what we're actually trying to fix in the error.
And then it says, okay, along with that,
I've built out the structure
of what the project you're working on.
I see the file that you're working on
and here's an interpretation of the error message
and how to resolve it.
Basically, not only just solving the problem for you,
but helping you understand,
oh, in the future, if you see something like this,
here's the problem state or why it was occurring.
And you could have just asked it to explain
or do other things or just generally chat with it,
but it pops up this ephemeral chat
where you can work with and again,
solve those problems that are runtime errors
or runtime outputs and explain it there.
So again, I talked a little bit about these tool calls
are in addition to what I would consider table stakes
features that people expect from Gen AI tools
and clients in your IDE, right?
So again, it already has all the awareness
of like the active file, the selected snippet of code,
your project-wide context,
and all of the training data that went into that model.
But we're enhancing it with the in-memory
or session level context or unique aspects
that Positron is bringing to the table.
We've got that additional things coming along
where there's like inline error correction, right?
The fix with assistant, right?
Again, where in your source files,
it directly ties there into sidebar chat,
inline chat, or those static analysis errors for fixing it
or the console errors and fixing it at runtime.
The code generation that you might typically do
if you were to go to like, you know,
chat GPT or cloud on the web and say,
hey, generate some code and then copy paste into my editor.
You can do that all the way within Positron.
You don't have to jump out of Positron
or your IDE to go do something and come back,
but you can make use of your preferred model provider
and models directly alongside the code that you're working on.
So what we're trying to say here is that Positron
is trying to set itself apart, not by saying,
oh, we're doing, you know, software development via AI,
but rather we're giving very specific,
tailor-made tools and contexts
that are unique to data science.
And this context helps align with how people do work
in Python or R with live data to go beyond
just the source files or the kind of core capabilities
that other AI providers and AI tool makers are providing.
Lastly, I also told Phil that, you know,
I talked a little bit about data apps,
and I think it's important to call out that, you know,
we have other expertise here within the company, right?
Like we've been developing Shiny for a long time.
And so part of what we're doing is showing examples
of how you could take the Positron Assistant
and extend it further.
So the Shiny extension within Positron
actually contributes what's called a chat participant.
And this allows you to make the model even better
at developing Shiny applications without fine-tuning it.
It just provides a lot of context and examples
to the model to say, hey,
here's how to design a good application
with best practices as of today,
modern Shiny app development.
You can ask it via this at Shiny in the chat
and then ask it a question.
And here I'm taking a script I have in R
and saying convert it to an application.
And it will assist you in writing a brand new app,
or you could take an existing application,
refactor it or improve upon it,
or modernize it, for example.
So this is, again, providing a lot of additional context
and you as a individual or as a user or user group,
you could imagine you could actually write
your own chat participants,
or there's other kind of integration points
where you can add in novel context via MCP servers
or other approaches to add context in
or add approaches that you are taking within your company.
Taking the bigger picture,
you could see that like this example I did,
I basically took an R file, one shot an application,
and then generated it, it put it into an app.R,
and then I just clicked run.
And now I can see the application side by side
with my source code and the chat that generated it.
And I can further iterate from there.
Again, trying to make it where
you obviously can do debugging
or kind of altering of your source file.
And in real time, just as you would do inside of Positron,
build up your application, see changes in real time,
and then continue to refactor,
basically assistants trying to help you out
throughout the process.
I see a lot of good questions in the chat,
so I'll try and kind of briefly touch
on a few items for the future
and then answer those questions there in the chat.
But I would say what we've been working on as well
are further modes or what I would call agents, right?
Assistant is very much like you ask, you get an answer,
and it has an agent mode where it can go do things,
but we're also working on tools
to actually help you with exploratory data analysis
in more of an agent way.
So I think there's a blog post out now,
and I can post into the chat about data bot, Phil.
And so that talks a little bit about what we're doing
in that area.
And I'll also mention that, again,
we're trying to bring additional model providers
to play here.
So we have Positron Assistant
is supported via Anthropic directly today,
but we're actively working on Copilot Chat,
as well as we plan to bring AWS Bedrock,
Snowflake, Databricks, and other providers
in the near future.
And lastly, again, there's some questions
about data and privacy, right?
We ultimately think that for a lot of folks,
in y'all's case, in y'all's industry,
we'll actually be doing routing of access
via centralized service,
or might even be self-hosting foundation models
for your company in a way where you don't even have
to send it outside of your privacy or your firewall.
I'm gonna go back through
and answer some of the chat questions.
I think I have two minutes, Phil, to go through that.
Yeah, we've got a ton of questions, Tom.
You're our last speaker,
so feel free to take these.
If you want me to help you read them out, I can,
or if you wanna just read them in the chat,
that's fine too.
So yeah, take them in.
As soon as you're, as soon as you wrapped up,
Eric's gonna pop in and say goodbye to everybody,
and then we'll wrap up the day, so yeah.
Awesome, sounds good.
There's one question, which is expected timeline
for AWS Bedrock integration.
What I would say is we currently
are testing that internally.
We actually use a lot of AWS Bedrock internally
for our own processes.
So I would imagine that is later this year
in 2025 is our goal.
And we have other providers, again,
where I think OpenAI compatible endpoints
as kind of a general approach,
and Copilot Chat are also very much the next set
of model providers that we're looking at.
So those are very top of mind for us.
There's a question about,
does Postron store or log context somewhere,
or is it only sent to the LLM API?
I do wanna acknowledge that locally
within your laptop or inside of Workbench,
that context is stored in logs.
Those are, again, your logs.
They don't go to Posit or to an external service.
Those are specific to your environment.
That's just a side effect of you're asking questions,
and there has to be a way to debug it for you locally.
You can choose to include portions of those
and expose them at like a debug or a notify level
and expand or decrease the logs,
but that's, again, your own data.
Another question, visibility of the plots is really cool.
I can see a value for use case
where you don't want the large language model
to see anything but code.
Can you wall off plots?
So you can turn off specific tool calls.
There's some UI elements for that.
And I would say long-term,
while we're kind of building out Positron Assistant
and really excited about it,
we know that there are needs
for both like administrative controls for a group
as well as like turning on or off certain features.
So you can make use of the models
in Positron Assistant in a certain way,
but maybe not expose everything on certain projects.
How is Positron Assistant different
than using the Elmer package?
What I would say is by the fact
of it being natively built into Positron,
it doesn't rely on an R runtime
and like an active R session to execute
or send the prompts back and forth.
Elmer is really powerful for being kind of
a low-level package for building into things
like Shiny applications with ShinyChat or QueryChat
or other approaches like that.
But ultimately, having it native within the IDE
means you just have to worry about my login credentials,
then you're good to go.
You don't have to worry about building up all the context
or managing prompts or all that things,
it's batteries included.
What are the benefits of using Positron Assistant
over GitHub Copilot and VS Code?
So one, I wanna mention again,
we are integrating Copilot Chat into Positron Assistant.
That's some of the work that we're exploring right now.
And ultimately again, Copilot is trying to solve
for a problem that is general software development, right?
It's remarkable, right?
Just like there are other AI tools out there
that are really, really good,
we're basically trying to expose those same models
with additional context and making it within Positron
and the other surfaces for doing data science work, right?
We're not trying to say that Positron
is only there for AI capabilities,
but more of it's building it for a data science user
and all the things you need like your console,
your environments pane, your plot pane,
the ability to run applications, explore data,
and also having a fantastic AI experience
that makes use of the best models
and has the best context it can.
The shiny chat demo in Positron
just sold me to make a switch.
That's great, yeah.
It's like, we're really trying to make this
a fantastic experience and really integrate it
into the workflows that we think are important.
But as I'm calling out here in section two,
there's also gonna be novel context or novel approaches
you might have within your organization,
within your company,
or with even just your personal approach.
So we do wanna make this extensible via text files,
via extensions, chat participants,
or even external context via MCP
and the model context protocol.
VS Code has an agentic option for Copilot.
Positron also has that.
So you can switch between modes of ask, edit, or agent.
Those have different levels of kind of tools
that are available to them
and kind of different things they can do
within the IDE and different power.
And you can even define your own custom chat modes
where you might define one that, again,
has your own addition to the prompt that you want to add in.
So that's also supported.
Positron, let's see,
will it be available as an extension for other IDE
or only available within Positron?
Positron Assistant is natively built into Positron.
So it really is only functional within Positron
and makes use of all the Positron-specific APIs.
So it doesn't really make sense
for us to extract that right now.
It's a tool for Positron.
But again, you can layer on top other tooling
that you'd wanna use.
Like if you have,
well, Positron Assistant can work in your shell,
right, in your terminal.
I've heard of customers and seen them use
some of the CLI tooling like Cloud Code
alongside Positron Assistant within your IDE.
So you get the best of data science,
the best of data science-specific chat.
And then you also have really, really strong
like Cloud Code integration for those agentic,
like build me out an entire project
with more software development focus.
I think that addressed the last question.
And then going back one more,
will Positron come at an added cost?
Positron is free on desktop, right?
So you could just download and try that today.
And if you do have Posit Workbench,
Positron is available through your existing subscription.
So there's not an additional charge there.
Positron Assistant is also free,
but you do have to pay somebody
to act as your model provider.
Importantly, that's not Posit.
We're not trying to receive your data,
but more of whatever provider you want.
And today that's Anthropic,
but we are working on additional model providers.
A lot of good questions.
I apologize.
I think I went over a little bit, Phil,
but just tried to answer it the most I could.
Yeah, no, I think we got to all of them.
If you see any in the chat box,
feel free to tackle that while-